# FluidPrototype

A fluid.

**Parent:** `Prototype`

## Properties

### Mandatory Properties

#### base_color

**Type:** `Color`

Used by bars that show the fluid color, like the flamethrower turret fill bar in the tooltip, or the fill bar for the fluid wagon tooltip; and for the pipe windows and storage tank fill gauges.

#### default_temperature

**Type:** `float`

Also the minimum temperature of the fluid. Has to be lower than `max_temperature`.

#### flow_color

**Type:** `Color`

Used only for pipe windows or storage tank fill gauges.

### Optional Properties

#### auto_barrel

**Type:** `boolean`

Whether the fluid should be included in the barrel recipes automatically generated by the base mod.

This property is not read by the game engine itself, but the base mod's data-updates.lua file. This means it is discarded by the game engine after loading finishes.

**Default:** `{'complex_type': 'literal', 'value': True}`

#### emissions_multiplier

**Type:** `double`

Scales pollution generated when the fluid is consumed.

**Default:** `{'complex_type': 'literal', 'value': 1.0}`

#### fuel_value

**Type:** `Energy`



**Default:** `{'complex_type': 'literal', 'value': '0J'}`

#### gas_temperature

**Type:** `float`

Above this temperature the `gas_flow` animation is used to display the fluid inside storage tanks and pipes.

**Default:** `max value of float`

#### heat_capacity

**Type:** `Energy`

Joule needed to heat 1 Unit by 1 °C.

**Default:** `{'complex_type': 'literal', 'value': '1kJ'}`

#### icon

**Type:** `FileName`

Path to the icon file.

Mandatory if `icons` is not defined.

#### icon_size

**Type:** `SpriteSizeType`

The size of the square icon, in pixels. E.g. `32` for a 32px by 32px icon. Must be larger than `0`.

Only loaded if `icons` is not defined.

**Default:** `{'complex_type': 'literal', 'value': 64}`

#### icons

**Type:** ``IconData`[]`

Can't be an empty array.

#### max_temperature

**Type:** `float`



**Default:** `value of `default_temperature``

#### visualization_color

**Type:** `Color`

Color to use for visualization. This color should be vibrant and easily distinguished.

If not specified, this will be auto-generated from `base_color` by converting to HSV, decreasing saturation by 10% and setting value to 80%.

