# Migrating to 2.0

A lot of things changed between 1.1 and 2.0.  This document briefly lists them.  The documentation in the README will point you at the full reference.

This document doesn't list new features, but things you need to know to play 2.0 if you were a 1.1 player.

## Things that don't work

A small number of things have not been ported to 2.0 yet:

- Spidertrons
- Combat
- Trains

## Important Key Changes

Fast travel has gone to `alt + v`.  `v` now does vertical flipping.

`y` is gone for the most part. Instead the information it provides is under `k`.  the "tooltips" like "this is an electric pole which moves electricity" is gone.

Vanilla has made it so that you no longer craft wires or remotes.  These are now all under various `alt + letter` combinations: `alt + r` and `alt + g` for red/green wires, `alt + c` for copper.  Pretty much all `alt + letter` combinations now give an item, which is temporary.

The tutorial system is being rewritten. `h` now does horizontal flipping.

## When UI is open, your hand no longer matters

Pretty much what it says, but it is worth calling this out explicitly. When a UI is open, you are always operating on the inventory slot etc. and never on what is in your hand. This means that you no longer have to have a copy of everything you want to work with in your own inventory, but does also mean that your reflexes may be out of date.

## Cursor Mode is Gone

Instead of cursor mode, `WASD` now always moves the cursor and the arrow keys now always walk.

Fast travel, bookmarks, and rulers are all the same as they used to be.

Build lock now maintains two separate build locks, one for your cursor and one for walking. Generally you will use one set of controls or the other.

## Logistics is via a menu

You get to personal logistics with `ctrl + alt + shift + l`.  You get to logistics for the selected entity with `ctrl + alt + l`.

The keys to make requests in the hand are gone.  2.0 logistics is overhauled in vanilla and there is no longer such a thing as "a request".  See the [official wiki](https://wiki.factorio.com/Logistic_network) for more.

## Belt Announcement and Fluids

Belt announcement and fluids have been changed to be clearer and to provide more information.

Belts now tell you what is ahead or behind rather than claiming to be empty when they aren't actually empty.

Fluids now announce the shapes of pipes.  For example, instead of "water east and west", it's now "water horizontal".  Lay out some pipes in various shapes to see how this works.

## UI

the UI experience has been completely overhauled:

- `ctrl + tab` now moves through "tabs", for example "everything to do with inventories", "everything to do with crafting".
- `tab` now moves through subtabs, for example main inventory, guns, logistic trash.
- Some menus now have horizontal movement so that things like circuit conditions can be grouped together.
- Instead of wrapping, you can now move to the edge of a UI with `ctrl + WASD`. To remember this, it's like `ctrl + home`, but multidirectional.
- All UIs are searchable.  Every last one of them.
- Craft all has moved to `ctrl + shift + left bracket`.
- Research always uses the research queue.
- You can now tell when you are at the beginning or end of the crafting or research queues, as they are a standard vertical menu.
- Warnings are now instant and no longer need you to toggle through ranges.
- `x` is no longer used in UI.  `Backspace` is "safe clear" e.g. flushing fluids or setting values back to unset (aka the inserter hand override).  `ctrl + backspace` is "dangerous delete", e.g. destroying planners and blueprints.

## Electric Pole Neighbor Announcement

Electric poles no longer announce their neighbors. To hear this information press `n`.  Instead you just get the count of other poles, which is usually enough.

## Steam Engine Helper is Gone

The problem with the steam engine alignment helper is that you must learn how fluids work and steam engines are the simplest case to practice with.  Because of this and the need to rewrite it in any case, the steam engine helper is gone.

## Offshore Pump helper moved to `alt + left bracket`

What it says.  `alt + left bracket` is the "do miscellaneous thing to map entity" button, the context sensitive key.  For offshore pumps this is the offshore pump helper.

Note also that we fixed offshore pumps so that you are building from the top left corner like anything else, which makes manual placement easier.

## Instant Mining is now Cut

The instant mining tool, `ctrl + x`, is now vanilla cut functionality.  This is like copy but marks the area for deconstruction.  Use Kruise Kontrol if you want to tear the entities down for real.

## Blueprint Books Reworked

Blueprint books now work like everything else.  `right bracket` to get at their inventories, `left bracket` builds.  You set the active blueprint by clicking it in the menu.  Rename book etc. are on a second subtab, press `tab` to get to it.

On the map, `m` and `.` cycle the active blueprint in the held book, and `comma` announces what the active blueprint is.  You no longer need to take blueprints out to use them.

Blueprint books no longer disassociate from your quickbar when you make configuration changes.

## Driving

Driving is now done with "heading"-based driving. `W` is always north, etc.  Your car no longer turns. Press the direction you want to go, and you go that way.

## Dropped Dependent Mods

Either because they were not updated to 2.0 or because they are no longer necessary, all dependent mods but our fork of Kruise Kontrol have been dropped.

We may bring some of these features back in some form given popular demand.
